# CS-499 Computer Science Capstone ePortfolio

# Professional Self-Assessment
Hello, 

My name is Jordan Crisler and welcome to my ePortfolio for my CS-499 Computer Science Capstone course from Southern New Hampshire University. This ePortfolio is a representation of the knowledge and skills that I have developed throughout the computer science program and represents the growth I have achieved. 
The coursework throughout this program and developing the ePortfolio has helped to showcase my strengths, shape my professional goals, and prepared me for the computer science field by giving me the foundations and skills needed, expanding my technical knowledge to solve real-world problems using algorithmic principles, computer science practices, and well-founded and innovative techniques. I have gained experience with collaborating in a team environment by participating in class discussions where we would discuss course topics and provide feedback and suggestions for projects and gained experience communicating with stakeholders through written design documents and presentations. In addition, I have gained experience working with data structures and algorithms, software engineering and databases, and security throughout the program. I have worked with data structures and algorithms, such as binary search trees or hash tables, in course CS-300 DSA: Analysis and Design. I have also gained experiencing working with software engineering and databases through courses such as DAD-220 Intro to Structure Database Environments and CS-340 Client/Server Development, which creates a database where a user can retrieve information from a MongoDB database using CRUD methods. In addition, I have learned about secure coding and security through courses such as CS-305 Software Security and CS-405 Secure Coding, in addition to implementing these principles throughout each course.

This ePortfolio help to demonstrate the full range of skills I have learned throughout the computer science program and help to showcase my abilities I have acquired. This ePortfolio showcases my abilities within three categories:
-	Software Design and Engineering
-	Algorithms and Data Structure
-	Databases

I have enhanced two artifacts that showcase my abilities across these categories. For the first artifact, this artifact showcases my abilities within the software design and engineering as well as the algorithms and data structure categories. The second artifact showcases my abilities within the databases category. These artifacts fit together and inform my ePortfolio as a whole by showing my skills to identify insufficiencies, enhance a program with the user’s needs in mind, and gives an insight into my overall process. In addition, these artifacts also demonstrate not only my technical skills, but also my growth throughout the program, problem-solving skills, commitment to continuous learning, and adaptability. 

# Course Outcomes: 
1. Employ strategies for building collaborative environments that enable diverse audiences to support organizational decision making in the field of computer science.
2. Design, develop, and deliver professional-quality oral, written, and visual communications that are coherent, technically sound, and appropriately adapted to specific audiences and contexts.
3. Design and evaluate computing solutions that solve a given problem using algorithmic principles and computer science practices and standards appropriate to its solution, while managing the trade-offs involved in design choices.
4. Demonstrate an ability to use well-founded and innovative techniques, skills, and tools in computing practices for the purpose of implementing computer solutions that deliver value and accomplish industry-specific goals.
5. Develop a security mindset that anticipates adversarial exploits in software architecture and designs to expose potential vulnerabilities, mitigate design flaws, and ensure privacy and enhanced security of data and resources.

# Code Review
[Code Review](https://youtu.be/qbqDSfNO9SI)

# Enhancement One: Software Design and Engineering
### Artifact One - Original

[Artifact One - Original](https://github.com/jcrisler1097/CS-499-Computer-Science-Capstone/blob/main/Artifact1-original.zip)

### Artifact One - Updated
[Artifact One - Updated](https://github.com/jcrisler1097/CS-499-Computer-Science-Capstone/blob/main/Artifact1-updated.zip)

  The first artifact I have chosen for my ePortfolio for the software engineering and design category  as well as the algorithms and data structures category is my coursework from course CS-320 Software Test, Automation, and Quality Assurance. This Java program is an application for a medical office that is used to collect contact information for clients, task information and store client appointments. This program stores the information in an array, implemented methods to search for clients, tasks, or appointments within the array, and then uses JUnit tests for each method to ensure that the information was entered correctly. 
	To improve this artifact, I have implemented a method to check for duplicate entries within the array and throw an exception if a duplicate entry is found before adding the duplicate entry to the array. This helps to improve this artifact, because it will improve and create more accurate search results for the user in addition to helping to eliminate redundancies within the array list. I have included this artifact in my ePortfolio, because it highlights my skills to check for inaccuracies with data that is collected for a program and my abilities in software development to throw exceptions when an error is found within a program to prevent duplicate entries from being added into a program’s data list, which can create inaccuracies in data and make searching for data more difficult for users. 
	In Module One, I planned to meet the course outcomes of 1, 2, and 4 with these enhancements to this artifact. By implementing these improvements to the artifact, I have meet these course outcomes as planned, because I was able to implement the updates intended, which built collaborative environments to support organizational decision making, delivered professional-quality communications and programs that are coherent, technically sound, and adapted to the specific audience, and implemented computer solutions that deliver value to the client and accomplish industry-specific goals. 
Reflecting on my process of enhancing and modifying the artifact, I learned about different ways to implement these checks for duplicate entries within an array list. One method I learned about is a HashSet, which doesn’t allow duplicate entries to be added. This created the challenge that I faced while enhancing my artifact: whether to change my array list to a HashSet or keep the array list. Ultimately, I chose to keep the array list in my program as HashSets do not have an order within them, which would cause issues within other methods of my artifact, specifically when creating unique IDs for contacts, tasks, or appointments. 

# Enhncement Two: Algorithms and Data Structures
### Artifact One - Original
[Artifact One - Original](https://github.com/jcrisler1097/CS-499-Computer-Science-Capstone/blob/main/Artifact1-original.zip)

### Artifact One - Updated
[Artifact One - Updated](https://github.com/jcrisler1097/CS-499-Computer-Science-Capstone/blob/main/Artifact1-updated.zip)

  The first artifact that I have chosen for my ePortfolio for the software engineering and design category as well as the algorithms and data structure category is my coursework from course CS-320 Software Test, Automation, and Quality Assurance. This artifact is a Java program for an application that can be used by a medical office to collect contact information for clients, task information, and store client appointments. This Java program stores the information in an array list, implements the methods to search for clients, tasks, or appointments within the array, and then uses JUnit tests for each method to ensure that the information was entered correctly and behaves as intended.  
  In the original artifact, the program only allowed users to search for data within the array for a client, task, or appointment by the unique ID or index. To improve this artifact for the algorithms and data structure category, I have implemented methods to improve the search methods within this program by expanding the searching capabilities for users. I have added methods to search the array by first name, last name, phone number, or address for the contact list, by name or description in the task list, and by date or description in the appointments list. This helps to improve the artifact by helping to expand the searching method which allows users to have an improved experience while searching for data within the array. The specific component of the artifact that showcases my abilities in algorithms and data structure is expanding the searching algorithm to allow users to search by more methods than by the ID or index. I chose this artifact for my ePortfolio, because it helps to highlight my abilities to expand the functionality of a program with user’s needs in mind and improve the searching algorithm of a program.  
  In Module One, I planned to meet the course outcomes of 2, 3, and 4 with these enhancements to this artifact. By implementing these enhancements to this artifact, I have met the course outcomes that I planned to meet in Module One. While enhancing this artifact, I was able to learn more about arrays, how they behave, and expand more on my knowledge of the Java language. One challenge that I faced while enhancing this artifact was deciding how to implement the expanded searching methods. Ultimately, I decided to build upon the methods I had already implemented and modify them to meet the new search parameters. 

# Enhancement Three: Databases
### Artifact Two - Original
[Artifact Two - Original](https://github.com/jcrisler1097/CS-499-Computer-Science-Capstone/blob/main/Artifact2-original.zip)

### Artifact Two - Updated
[Artifact Two - Updated](url)

  The second artifact I have chosen for my ePortfolio for the databases category is my coursework from course CS-340 Client/Server Development, which I took during the spring of 2025. In this artifact, the program, which is comprised of a Python file and a Jupyter Notebook file, created a database for an animal shelter and implemented the create, read, update, and delete methods, or CRUD, for records within the MongoDB database. 
	To improve this artifact, I have implemented functionality that expands upon the existing CRUD methods and creates methods that allows a user to create multiple records, update multiple records, deleted multiple records, replaces a record, and replaced multiple records. I selected this artifact to include in my ePortfolio, because it highlights my abilities to expand a program’s functionality to improve a user’s experience. In addition, this program highlights my abilities to work with databases, create a dashboard that users can filter results with, and raise exceptions when necessary. While working on improving this artifact, I learned about the different methods that can be implemented, such as the replace method, to expand the functionality of a program. One challenge I faced while working on this assignment is getting the Jupyter Notebook program to function correctly, as I experienced issues with the kernel not starting and not showing me any output for my program. However, after restarting the kernel a few times, I was finally able to get it to show an output. With this artifact, the course outcomes that I planned to meet with this enhancement in Module One was course outcome 5. By implementing these improvements to the artifact, I have met this course outcome. 
